Custom types (``custom/*``)
===========================

+-----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| data type       | custom/*                                                     |
+-----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| content types   | */*                                                          |
+-----------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+

Custom types can be used for data that has **very few specific uses** or that is **only used by a small number of plugins**.

.. warning:: Before creating a new custom format, first consider any of the existing formats for :ref:`entities <data-formats/data-model:entities>`, :ref:`relations <data-formats/data-model:relations>`, :ref:`graphs <data-formats/data-model:graphs>`, or :ref:`executables <data-formats/data-model:executables>`.
    Creating a new custom data type should be considered last.



Data Types
----------


custom/kernel-matrix
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. TODO:: fill in information about custom data types in use


custom/clusters
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. TODO:: fill in information about custom data types in use


custom/attribute-distances
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Represents distances between two :ref:`entities <data-formats/data-model:entities>` based on a single specific attribute. 
The output is delivered as an ``application/zip`` archive containing one ``.json`` file per attribute.

**JSON Schema (per attribute file):**
A list of objects representing pairwise distances:

* ``ID`` (string): Unique identifier for the comparison.
* ``entity_1_ID`` (string): ID of the first entity.
* ``entity_2_ID`` (string): ID of the second entity.
* ``href`` (string): Optional reference link.
* ``distance`` (float | null): The calculated distance score. Can be null if missing or invalid.

**Example:** Attribute ``dominanteCharaktereigenschaft`` of the MUSE dataset.

.. code-block:: json 

    ...
    {
    "ID": "44_21_1__45_7_2__dominanteCharaktereigenschaft",
    "entity_1_ID": "44_21_1", (Id of entity with dominanteCharaktereigenschaft=aktiv)
    "entity_2_ID": "45_7_2",
    "href": "",
    "distance": 0.5
    },
    ...

| *ID 44_21_1 is the ID of entity with dominanteCharaktereigenschaft=aktiv*
| *ID 45_7_2 is the ID of entity with dominanteCharaktereigenschaft=gut*

**Example Usage**

* Output generated by :ref:`sim-to-dist-transformers`.
* Input needed for :ref:`distance-aggregator`.

.. TODO:: check if data type can be replaced by relation/distance


custom/attribute-similarities
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Represents pairwise similarity scores between two :ref:`entities <data-formats/data-model:entities>` based on a single specific attribute. 
The output is delivered as an ``application/zip`` archive containing one ``.json`` file per attribute.

**JSON Schema (per attribute file):**
A list of objects representing pairwise similarities:

* ``ID`` (string): Unique identifier for the comparison (format: ``{ent1_ID}__{ent2_ID}__{attribute}``).
* ``entity_1_ID`` (string): ID of the first entity.
* ``entity_2_ID`` (string): ID of the second entity.
* ``href`` (string): Optional reference link.
* ``similarity`` (float | null): The calculated similarity score. 

**Example:** Attribute ``dominanteCharaktereigenschaft`` of the MUSE dataset.

.. code-block:: json

    ...
    {
    "ID": "44_21_1__45_7_2__dominanteCharaktereigenschaft",
    "entity_1_ID": "44_21_1", (Id of entity with dominanteCharaktereigenschaft=aktiv)
    "entity_2_ID": "45_7_2",
    "href": "",
    "similarity": 0.5
    },
    ...

| *ID 44_21_1 is the ID of entity with dominanteCharaktereigenschaft=aktiv*  
| *ID 45_7_2 is the ID of entity with dominanteCharaktereigenschaft=gut*

**Example Usage**

* Output generated by :ref:`sym-max-mean`.
* Input needed for :ref:`sim-to-dist-transformers`.

.. TODO:: check if data type can be replaced by relation/similarity

custom/element-similarities
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Represents pairwise similarity scores between two element values of :ref:`entities <data-formats/data-model:entities>` based on their taxanomy.
The output is delivered as an ``application/zip`` archive containing one ``.json`` file per compared attribute.

**JSON Schema (per attribute file):**
A list of objects representing the element-to-element similarity:

* ``source`` (string/any): The first attribute value/element being compared.
* ``target`` (string/any): The second attribute value/element being compared.
* ``similarity`` (float): The calculated similarity score (e.g., Wu-Palmer score).

**Example:** Attribute ``dominanteCharaktereigenschaft`` of the MUSE dataset.

.. code-block:: json

    ...
    {
    "source": "aktiv",
    "target": "gut",
    "similarity": 0.5
    },
    ...


**Example Usage**

* Output generated by :ref:`wu-palmer`.
* Input needed for :ref:`sym-max-mean`.


.. TODO:: check if data type can be replaced by relation/similarity


custom/entity-distances
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Represents the total, aggregated distance between two :ref:`entities <data-formats/data-model:entities>` across multiple attributes.
The output is delivered as a single ``application/json`` file.

**JSON Schema:**
A list of objects representing the aggregated entity-to-entity distance:

* ``ID`` (string): Unique identifier for the comparison (format: ``{ent1_ID}_{ent2_ID}``).
* ``entity_1_ID`` (string): ID of the first entity.
* ``entity_2_ID`` (string): ID of the second entity.
* ``href`` (string): Optional reference link.
* ``distance`` (float): The aggregated distance score (e.g., Mean, Median, Max, Min).

**Example:** Attribute ``dominanteCharaktereigenschaft``, ``dominanteFarbe``, ``dominanterAlterseindruck``, ``dominanterZustand``, ``genre`` of the MUSE dataset.

.. code-block:: json

    ...
    {
    "ID": "44_21_1_45_7_2",
    "entity_1_ID": "44_21_1", 
    "entity_2_ID": "45_7_2",
    "href": "",
    "distance": 0.5133333333333334
    },
    ...

| *ID 44_21_1 is the ID of entity with dominanteCharaktereigenschaft=aktiv* 
| *ID 45_7_2 is the ID of entity with dominanteCharaktereigenschaft=gut*

**Example Usage**

* Output generated by :ref:`distance-aggregator`.
* Input needed for :ref:`mds`.

.. TODO:: check if data type can be replaced by relation/distance


custom/nisq-analyzer-result
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. TODO:: fill in information about custom data types in use


custom/pca-metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. TODO:: fill in information about custom data types in use


custom/plot
^^^^^^^^^^^

Custom data type for presentational plots (e.g., html output from pyplot).

.. TODO:: maybe define new base data type for purely presentational data like plots, text, etc.


custom/hello-world-output
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Custom data type for demo text output of the hello world plugins.


Current Non-Standard Custom Types
---------------------------------

This is a list of custom types that are not using the ``custom/`` prefix.

.. danger:: Do not use these types in new plugins!

* ``representative-circuit/*`` should be replaced with ``executable/circuit`` and a data name starting with ``representative-circuit``.
* ``plot/*`` should be replaced with ``custom/plot``
* ``txt/*`` should be replaced with ``custom/text``
* ``qnn-weights/*``
* ``vqc-metadata/*``
